--- Page 49 ---
49

Low risk - FRS- CVD risk <10%

Intermediate risk – FRS -CVD 10-20%

High risk - FRS- CVD >20%

Very high risk - FRS- CVD >30%
Patients with low risk should be counselled to maintain their status of health and to have regular
reviews, while those with intermediate to high risks should be followed-up, and maintained on
lifestyle interventions and pharmacotherapy for their specific risk factors, e.g. treatment of
hypertension, LDL-C, smoking cessation, effective diabetes control, and encouraging physical
activity and healthy eating.19
(Level II, Grade B)
5.3.2
Stroke Risk Estimates
The Stroke Riskometer App, a smart phone-based application available in various languages
(including the Malay language) allows for individualized stroke risk calculation, using 20 modifiable
and non-modifiable risk factors. It contains educational videos for self-management of risk factors.20
The app calculates individualized 5- and 10-year risks of stroke and is an effective tool for monitoring
risk reductions associated with lifestyle and medical interventions. The Malay version has been
validated for language and content (unpublished data).21 Two interventional studies using Stroke
Riskometer as a tool to reduce stroke risk have been completed among Malaysians with high risk
(diabetics and stroke carers), with positive outcomes.22,23
The use of Stroke Riskometer and R-FRS Calculator may be beneficial in the community and in
clinics for individualizing stroke risk and its management.20
(Level II, Grade B)
5.4 Prevention and Management of Risk Factors
5.4.1
Lifestyle Changes
The US Health Professionals and Nurses study showed that participants who achieved all five
healthy lifestyle choices (not smoking, moderate intake of alcohol, BMI <25 kg/m2 , daily exercise for
30 minutes and a healthy diet score in the top 40%), had their incidence of stroke reduced by 80% as
compared to those who achieved none.24
A study among 11450 Swedish men with high cardiovascular risk (hypertensive, high cholesterol,
diabetes, heart failure or atrial fibrillation) showed that adopting all five healthy lifestyle choices [(≥5
servings of fruits and vegetables and <30g/day of processed meat; not smoking; ≥150min of physical
activity /week; BMI 18.5-25 kg/m2; low to moderate alcohol consumption (>0 to <30g/day)] had a
72% reduction of stroke incidence over 9 years as compared to those who were adherent to none or
only one healthy behaviour.25
Recommendation: Adopting a healthy lifestyle (diets rich in fruits and vegetables, no smoking, daily
exercise of >30 minutes or 150 minutes/week, low to moderate alcohol intake and maintaining a
normal BMI of 18.5-25 kg/m2) reduces stroke incidence in normal and high-risk populations.24,25
(New recommendation, Level I, Grade A)
5.4.2
Hypertension
Hypertension is the commonest and major risk factor for both ischaemic and haemorrhagic strokes in
Malaysia, affecting 69.9% of patients with the first ever stroke.2 The incidence of stroke increases in
proportion to both systolic and diastolic blood pressures. Isolated systolic hypertension is an
--- Page 50 ---
50
important risk factor for stroke in the elderly (systolic blood pressure >140mmHg and diastolic blood
pressure <90mmHg).26
Population specific and individualized strategies should be conducted to prevent the development of
hypertension. Adopting healthy lifestyle such as smoking cessation, Dietary Action to Stop
Hypertension (DASH) diet, increased physical activity and reducing salt consumption are shown to
reduce the risk of developing hypertension.27
(Level I, Grade A)
5.4.2.1 Primary Stroke Prevention in Specific High-risk Group with Hypertension
The ACCORD BP trial showed that a lower target systolic value of 120 mmHg was superior to a
target value of 140 mmHg in preventing any stroke and non-fatal stroke in diabetics, as secondary
endpoint, but did not prevent other cardiovascular events.28 The SPRINT (Systolic Blood Pressure
Intervention Trial) study showed that intensive BP lowering regime to a target of ≤120 mmHg in
high-risk non-diabetic hypertensive patients aged 50 years or older led to a reduction in all
cardiovascular events and mortality but with an excess of adverse events in the intensive group.29
However, there was no significant reduction in stroke event in these patients compared to the
non-intensive group.
Large randomized controlled trials and meta-analyses have confirmed that reduction in blood
pressure reduces first ever and recurrent stroke by 40%.30,31
(Level I)
Lowering the systolic blood pressure by 10mmHg is associated with a reduction in risk of stroke by
about a third, irrespective of baseline blood pressure levels.31
(Level I)
For diabetics with hypertension, lowering systolic blood pressure to a target of 120 mmHg or below
with careful monitoring of adverse events led to a significant reduction in stroke incidence.26
Recommendation: Target BP for diabetics is <130mmHg systolic and <80mmHg diastolic,
preferably <120mmHg if tolerated.
(New recommendation, Level I, Grade A)
For high-risk non-diabetic hypertensive patients, intensive systolic BP lowering to below 120mmHg
led to excess adverse events without reduction in stroke incidence.27
(New recommendation, Level I, Grade B)
Recommendation: Newly diagnosed hypertension in the very elderly (>80 years of age) should be
treated.32
(New recommendation, Level I, Grade B)
5.4.3
Smoking
The Malaysian National Stroke Registry data showed that 51% of all patients with the first ever stroke
were smokers. All forms of smoking, both active and passive, are a major risk factor for stroke.2
Smokers who stopped for more than 5 years have the same risk as non-smokers.33
(Level III)
Recommendation: Cessation of smoking is strongly recommended.
(Level III, Grade C)
--- Page 51 ---
51
5.4.3.1 Smoking And Non Communicable Diseases
Smoking of tobacco and tobacco products (cigarette, electronic cigarette/vape, shisha, pipe, cigar
etc.) can lead to various non-communicable diseases (NCDs). Worldwide, more than eight million
people die every year because of this habit (WHO Tobacco Fact Sheet, 2020).
Hence, the decision to integrate smoking treatment with NCDs is important to reduce the prevalence
of NCDs and their complications. This decision was made during the World Health Organization
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC) Steering Committee Meeting in December
2019 chaired by the Honourable Health Minister of Malaysia.
The treatment for smoking should be initiated by the treating doctor based on the assessment and
treatment of tobacco use disorder as in Table 1. Details on this can be found in the CPG on
Treatment of Tobacco Use Disorder 2016, available at:
https://www.moh.gov.my/moh/resources/Penerbitan/CPG/Respiratory/CPG_TobacoDisorder.pdf
Table 5.1: Assessment and treatment of tobacco use disorder
ASSESSMENT AND TREATMENT
1.
Ask and document smoking status for all patients.
2.
Provide brief advice on quit smoking at every visit to all smokers.
3.
Assess level of nicotine addiction using Modified Fagerström Test for Cigarette Dependence
Questionnaire (COMPULSORY) and verify smoking status using carbon monoxide (CO)
breath analyser (IF AVAILABLE).
4.
Offer pharmacotherapy to all smokers who are attempting to quit, unless contraindicated.
5.
If selected, use nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) for at least eight to twelve weeks,
whereas varenicline should be used for at least twelve weeks.
6.
Combination therapy (e.g. two NRTs, a non-NRT, e.g. bupropion with an NRT) is better than
monotherapy in smoking cessation treatment and may be most useful for those smokers at
highest risk of relapse.
7.
Use smoking cessation medications with caution in special populations (e.g. children and
adolescents, pregnant, breastfeeding women, psychiatric and substance abuse disorder
patients).
8.
Arrange a minimum of six to eight face to face follow-up sessions for smoking cessation
interventions in six months through counselling support team (health education officer,
pharmacists or any officer trained for quit smoking services).
5.4.4
Alcohol
Alcohol consumption has been identified as one of the risk factors for global stroke burden.33 Heavy
alcohol drinking, of more than 4 units/day (1unit = 1glass wine = 1 pack of hard liquor), increases the
risk of stroke.
Recommendation: Avoid heavy alcohol consumption or limit to < 1 drink per day.
(New recommendation, Level II-2, Grade B)
5.4.5
Post-menopausal Hormone Replacement Therapy
Stroke rates rapidly rise in women once they become menopausal. The Nurses’ Health Study (6-year
follow-up of 59,337 postmenopausal women) showed only a weak association between stroke and
oestrogen replacement therapy. However, the Women’s Health Initiative Estrogen Plus Progestin
Study (E+P Study) showed a 31% increase in the risk of stroke due to E+ P.34
--- Page 52 ---
52
Recommendation: Post-menopausal hormonal therapy may increase the risk of stroke and is not
recommended for primary stroke prevention.
(Level II, Grade B)
5.4.6
Diabetes
Case-control studies of stroke patients and prospective epidemiological studies have confirmed an
independent effect of diabetes on ischaemic stroke, with an increased relative risk in diabetics
ranging from 1.8- to nearly 6-folds.35
(Level II-2)
Recommendation: Tight control of hypertension in diabetics is recommended to reduce stroke
incidence.27
(Level I, Grade A)
A systematic review and meta-analysis of observational cohort and nested case-control cohort
studies showed that compared to controls with a normal HbA1c range (i.e. <5.7%), patients with
diabetes mellitus with an abnormal HbA1c range (i.e. ≥6.5%) had an increased risk of first-ever
stroke with an average HR [] of 2.15 [95% CI 1.76, 2.63].In those with a pre–diabetes mellitus HbA1c
range (i.e. 5.7– 6.5%) there was not increased risk of first-ever stroke (average HR 1.19 ,95% CI
0.87, 1.62). 36
Recommendation: More intensive glycaemic control targets (HbA1c <6.5%) may be required for
optimal ischemic stroke prevention.
(Level I, Grade A)
5.4.7
Hyperlipidaemia
Although the relationship between high cholesterol and increased risk of coronary heart disease is
stronger, epidemiological studies have also shown an association between raised serum lipids and
risk of ischaemic stroke.37,38
The MRC/BHF, a RCT involving 20,536 high risk individuals showed that statin therapy significantly
reduced the incidence of fatal and non-fatal strokes by 28%.39 A meta-analysis of trials on statin
therapy versus control in individuals with a 5-year risk of major vascular events lower than 10%,
showed that each 1 mmol/L reduction in LDL cholesterol levels produced an absolute reduction in
major vascular events of about 11 per 1000 over 5 years.40
The HOPE-3 trial studied 12,705 patients with intermediate risk and used fixed-dose BP lowering
(Candersartan and HCTZ), cholesterol lowering (Rosuvastain) or combination treatment regime. It
was found that a low-dose Rosuvastatin therapy and combination treatment reduced stroke
incidence by 30% and 44%, respectively.41
A prospective study involving 7484 elderly population (>65 years) with no history of vascular events
showed that the use of statins or fibrates reduced stroke incidence by 30%.42
In the high-risk group (those with cardiovascular disease, occlusive arterial disease, or diabetes),
statin therapy is recommended to reduce the incidence of coronary events and ischaemic strokes,
even amongst individuals with normal cholesterol concentrations.39
(Level I, Grade A)
In the high-risk group, intensive lipid lowering therapy is superior in reducing stroke as compared to
normal therapy.39
(New recommendation, Level I)
--- Page 53 ---
53
Low dose statin is beneficial in reducing stroke risk in patients with low and intermediate risk.41,42
(New recommendation, Level II, Grade B)
Low dose statin is beneficial in reducing stroke risk in elderly patients with no vascular events.42
(New recommendation, Level II, Grade B)
5.4.8
Dietary Factors
The PREDIMED study showed that a Mediterranean diet enriched with either olive oil or mixed nuts,
reduced the incidence of stroke by 47% in 5 years as compared to a low fat diet.43 A meta-analysis
involving 20 prospective studies showed that diet rich in fruits and vegetables reduced stroke
incidence with a linear inverse relationship between fruits and vegetables consumption and stroke
incidence.44
Recommendation: A Mediterranean diet rich in olive oil and canola oil, with less meat and
increased vegetables is beneficial for stroke prevention.43
(New recommendation, Level II, Grade B)
Recommendation: A diet rich in fruits (citrus type) and vegetables (green leafy) is beneficial in
reducing stroke.44
(New recommendation, Level II, Grade B)
Recommendation: DASH diet that is high in vegetables and fruits and low in saturated fats is
beneficial in reducing BP.45
(New recommendation, Level I, Grade A)
5.4.9
Physical Activity
Physical activity is defined as any bodily movements involving skeletal muscles that results in energy
expenditure and may involve occupational and leisure time activities such as walking, commuting
and housework. However, meta-analyses of observational studies on physical activity and stroke
showed that increased physical activity in healthy adults reduced stroke incidence by 20-25%46 and
stroke mortality by 17% irrespective of gender.47 Analysis from the Japanese Diabetes Complications
study showed that increased physical activity (30 minutes of walking daily) reduced stroke incidence
in diabetics by 45%.48
Recommendation: Increased physical activity is recommended for stroke prevention in healthy
adults and high-risk patients.46-48
(New recommendation, Level I, Grade A)
Asymptomatic Carotid Stenosis
See Revascularization Procedures
Atrial fibrillation
See Cardio-embolism & Stroke
5.4.10
Medical Therapy
5.4.10.1 Aspirin
The ARRIVE trial which involved 12500 participants with moderate cardiovascular risk and low risk of
bleeding, showed that Aspirin did not prevent the first occurrence of cardiovascular events and
stroke as compared to placebo.49
Similarly, the Japanese Primary Prevention Project, a randomized controlled trial which involved
elderly patients (60-85 years of age) with hypertension, diabetes and hyperlipidaemia did not show
--- Page 54 ---
54
the net benefit of Aspirin in stroke prevention. There were concerns that Aspirin use may lead to
increased incidence of intracranial bleeding in Asian patients.50
The ASCEND Aspirin study, a RCT which involved 15480 diabetic patients did not show a net benefit
of Aspirin in preventing stroke or cardiovascular events, but with an increased risk of bleeding.51
Recommendation: Daily Aspirin is not recommended for primary prevention of stroke in diabetics,
moderate risk individuals or elderly patients in view of the high risk of bleeding which outweighs any
benefits.49-51
(New recommendation, Level I, Grade A)
Recommendations Summary:
Table 5.2: Primary Prevention and Management of Risk Factors
Factors
Recommendations
Level of
Evidence
Grade
Hypertension
Self-BP monitoring is recommended for all hypertensive
patients.
New recommendation
I
A
Risk stratification for hypertension based on CVD risk,
target organ damage and complications are
recommended for optimizing therapy.
New recommendation
Lifestyle changes if systolic BP is between
130-139mmHg
and/or diastolic BP is 80-89mmHg with
three to six-monthly review.
New recommendation
I
A
Treat medically if systolic BP is >140mmHg and/or
diastolic BP is >90mmHg.
I
A
Hypertension should be treated in the very elderly
(age >80years) to reduce the risk of stroke.
New recommendation
I
B
Diabetes Mellitus
Strict blood pressure control is important in diabetics.
I
A
More intensive glycaemic control targets (HbA1c
<6.5%) may be required for optimal ischemic stroke
prevention.
I
A
Target BP for diabetics is systolic BP <130mmHg and
diastolic BP <80mmHg, preferably <120mmHg if
tolerated.
New recommendation
I
A
Hyperlipidaemia
Treatment of dyslipidaemia / LDL-C is stratified based
on risk.
I
B
High-risk group: lowering LDL to <1.8 mmol/l is
recommended.
New recommendation
Intermediate and low risk: keep LDL <3.4mmol/l.
Low-risk group may benefit from cholesterol-lowering
therapy with a statin.
New recommendation
No risk – keep LDL <4.2 mmol/L.
Smoking
Cessation of smoking.
III
C
Aspirin therapy
Aspirin therapy is not recommended for primary
prevention of stroke in the elderly, diabetics, or other
high-risk groups.
New recommendation
I
A
